POLLS ARE IN, BUT RESULTS IN
ISRAEL ARE TOO CLOSE TO CALL IF
NETANYAHU CAN HOLD ON TO POWER.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY:
MAKING CONTACT SPORTS SAFER.
TECHNOLOGY ALERTS TRAINERS AND
TEAMMATES WHEN PLAYERS TAKE
HEAVY BLOWS.
>> WE CAN ACTUALLY IDENTIFY NINE
LOCATIONS AROUND THE HEAD  AND
IDENTIFY THE FORCE OF IMPACT
FROM THOSE NINE LOCATIONS.
IT DOES NOT INDICATE ANYTHING
ABOUT YOUR LEVEL OF INJURY.
IT INDICATES YOUR LEVEL OF
IMPACT.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, FIGHTING
CANCER WITH THE IMMUNE SYSTEM.
SCIENTISTS RE-ENGINEER T-CELLS
TO TURN THEM INTO WEAPONS THAT
HEAL.
>> I GOT AN EMAIL FROM OUR
PHYSICIAN, THAT THE LEUKEMIA
BIOPSY CAME BACK WITH NO MORE
LEUKEMIA, MY ACTUAL RESPONSE TO
HIM WAS I DONT BELIEVE IT.
SO THEY WENT AND THREE DAYS
LATER REPEATED THIS, AND THEN
GOT THE SAME ANSWER, THERE WAS
NO LEUKEMIA.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: A ONE-TIME REPUBLICAN
RISING STAR ABRUPTLY QUIT
CONGRESS TODAY, AMID ALLEGATIONS
OF LAVISH SPENDING FROM HIS
OFFICE ACCOUNT.
ILLINOIS REPRESENTATIVE AARON
SCHOCK FACED REPORTS OF COSTLY
OFFICE DECOR, PRIVATE JET
FLIGHTS AND EXCESSIVE MILEAGE
REIMBURSEMENT FOR HIS PRIVATE
CAR.
IN HIS STATEMENT TODAY, HE SAID:
"THE CONSTANT QUESTIONS... HAVE
PROVEN A GREAT DISTRACTION THAT
MADE IT TOO DIFFICULT FOR ME TO
SERVE..."
SCHOCK WON A FOURTH TERM LAST
NOVEMBER.
HIS RESIGNATION TAKES EFFECT AT
MONTH'S END.
>> Woodruff: A HOUSE COMMITTEE
GRILLED THE SECRET SERVICE
DIRECTOR TODAY OVER AN ALLEGED
DRUNKEN DRIVING INCIDENT
INVOLVING TWO SENIOR AGENTS.
JOSEPH CLANCY DISPUTED REPORTS
THAT THEY CRASHED INTO A WHITE
HOUSE CONSTRUCTION BARRIER
DURING A BOMB INVESTIGATION.
HE SAID THEY "NUDGED" THE
BARRIER.
HE ACKNOWLEDGED NOT LEARNING OF
THE INCIDENT FOR SEVERAL DAYS.
>> AT THE LEAST OF THE
DESCRIPTION OF THESE EVENTS I
SHOULD HAVE STILL BEEN INFORMED
OF WHAT TRANSPIRED THAT EVENING.
ANY TIME YOU HAVE A SENIOR LEVEL
ON THE PRESIDENT'S DETAIL WHO IS
ALLEGED TO HAVE EVEN COME
THROUGH A SECURE AREA AS HE DID
THAT EVENING, I SHOULD HAVE BEEN
INFORMED AND WE'RE FOLLOWING UP
ON THAT AND THERE WILL BE
ACCOUNTABILITY.
>> YOU CAN'T RUN AN AGENCY LIKE
THIS FOR GOD'S SAKE OR ANY OTHER
AGENCY UNLESS YOU HAVE
DISCIPLINE IN THE RANKS.
THIS IS A BREAKDOWN, TO PUT IT
MILDLY, OF DISCIPLINE WITHIN THE
RANKS OF YOUR AGENCY AND THAT'S
A CANCER.
>> Woodruff: CLANCY SAID IT'S
CLEAR HE'S GOT A LOT OF WORK TO
DO TO CHANGE THE AGENCY'S
CULTURE.
>> Ifill: THE SENATE DEADLOCKED
AGAIN TODAY ON A BILL TO HELP
VICTIMS OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING.
DEMOCRATS OBJECTED TO AN ANTI-
ABORTION PROVISION.
REPUBLICANS SAID THEY WON'T VOTE
ON ATTORNEY GENERAL NOMINEE
LORETTA LYNCH, UNTIL THE BILL
PASSES.
THE TWO SIDES TRADED ARGUMENTS,
AWAY FROM THE SENATE FLOOR.
>> I'VE SAID ALL ALONG I THOUGHT
THE PRESIDENT'S NOMINEE FOR
ATTORNEY GENERAL IS ENTITLED TO
BE CONSIDERED ON THE SENATE
FLOOR AND SHE WILL BE CONSIDERED
JUST AS SO AS ONWE FINISH THIS
VERY IMPORTANT BILL.
>> WE CAN APPROVE NOMINEES AS WE
WORK ON LEGISLATION, WE DID THAT
JUST YESTERDAY WHEN WE PASSED
TWO NOMINEES.
THEY COULD DO THE SAME TO
LORETTA LYNCH AND SHE'D PASS
LIKE THAT.
>> Ifill: LYNCH IS THE U.S.
ATTORNEY IN BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.
SHE WAS NOMINATED IN NOVEMBER.
>> Woodruff: FEDERAL AGENCIES
HAVE SET A NEW RECORD FOR
PAYING BENEFITS TO THOSE WHO
DON'T QUALIFY.
THE GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE SAID TODAY MISTAKEN
PAYMENTS TOPPED $125 BILLION
LAST YEAR.
THAT WAS UP $19 BILLION FROM
2013, AFTER DECLINING FOR
SEVERAL YEARS.
MOST OF THE PAYMENTS INVOLVED
MEDICARE, MEDICAID AND THE
EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT.
>> Ifill: THE UNITED NATIONS'
HEALTH AGENCY REPORTS 500,000
NEWBORNS DIE EACH YEAR IN
DEVELOPING NATIONS FOR LACK OF
GOOD SANITATION.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
SAYS IT FOUND MANY COULD BE
SAVED BY BEING WASHED AND CARED
FOR IN A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT.
BUT, MORE THAN A THIRD OF
HOSPITALS IN THOSE COUNTRIES
HAVE NOWHERE FOR STAFF AND
PATIENTS TO WASH THEIR HANDS.
>> Woodruff: RELIEF WORKERS
TODAY REACHED SOME OF THE
OUTLYING ISLANDS IN VANUATU, IN
THE WAKE OF A FIERCE CYCLONE.
THE STORM TORE THROUGH THE SOUTH
PACIFIC NATION LAST WEEKEND.
THE ISLAND OF TANNA TOOK A
DIRECT HIT, AND AID GROUPS
WARNED TODAY THE 29,000 PEOPLE
THERE ARE RUNNING OUT OF FOOD
AND BASIC SUPPLIES.
>> FOOD RELIEF, TEMPORARY
SHELTER.
THESE ARE THE LIFE SUSTAINING
ELEMENTS THAT WE NEED TO GET IN
PLACE AND WE NEED TO GET THEM IN
A HURRY.
>> Woodruff: DESPITE THE
DEVASTATION, THE STORM'S DEATH
TOLL WAS LOWERED TODAY, TO 11.
>> Ifill: CALIFORNIA WILL FACE
TOUGHER CURBS ON WATER USE, AS A
DROUGHT HEADS INTO ITS FOURTH
YEAR.
THE STATE WATER RESOURCES
CONTROL BOARD MOVED TODAY TO
EXTEND EXISTING LIMITS AND ADD
NEW ONES.
AMONG OTHER THINGS: RESIDENTS
MUST LIMIT WATERING LAWNS TO
TWICE A WEEK.
AND, IF THEY WANT WATER AT
RESTAURANTS, THEY'LL HAVE TO ASK
FOR IT.
>> Woodruff: THE GLOW OF THE
NORTHERN LIGHTS MAY PUSH
SUBSTANTIALLY FARTHER SOUTH
TONIGHT, THANKS TO A POWERFUL
SOLAR STORM.
FORECASTERS SAY THE DISPLAY
COULD BE VISIBLE AS FAR SOUTH AS
TENNESSEE AND OKLAHOMA.
THE SOLAR STORM COULD ALSO
AFFECT POWER GRIDS AND THROW OFF
G.P.S. TRACKING DEVICES.
>> Ifill: ON WALL STREET, STOCKS
MOSTLY GAVE BACK SOME OF
MONDAY'S GAINS, AS INVESTORS
WORRIED AGAIN ABOUT INTEREST
RATES.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST NEARLY 130 POINTS TO CLOSE
BELOW 17,850.
THE NASDAQ ROSE EIGHT POINTS,
BUT THE S&P 500 SLIPPED SEVEN.
>> Woodruff: AND, ST. PATRICK'S
DAY BROUGHT THE USUAL
CELEBRATIONS, AND, A RENEWED
DEBATE OVER WHO GETS TO MARCH.
NEW YORK CITY HELD ITS 254th
ANNUAL PARADE, AND FOR THE FIRST
TIME, INCLUDED AN OPENLY GAY
GROUP.
BUT OTHERS WERE STILL BARRED,
AND GAY RIGHTS ADVOCATES CALLED
FOR GREATER INCLUSION.
BOSTON'S PARADE, LAST SUNDAY,
LIFTED ITS BAN ON GAYS AND
LESBIANS MARCHING.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
ISRAELIS CAST THEIR VERDICT ON
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU.
REPUBLICANS PROPOSE DEEP CUTS TO
BALANCE THE BUDGET.
TECHNOLOGY DESIGNED TO MAKE
CONTACT SPORTS SAFER.
A NEW BOOK EXPLAINS WHY PARENTS
AND STUDENTS SHOULDN'T STRESS
OVER COLLEGE APPLICATIONS.
TURNING THE BODY'S IMMUNE SYSTEM
INTO A CANCER FIGHTING WEAPON.
PLUS, HOW THE GENERATIONS DIFFER
WHEN IT COMES TO SAVING FOR
RETIREMENT.
>> Woodruff: VOTERS IN ISRAEL
CAST THEIR BALLOTS TODAY TO
DECIDE THE FUTURE OF ISRAELI
PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANAYAHU.
VOTING ENDED JUST A FEW HOURS
AGO, AND AT THIS MOMENT, IT'S
TOO CLOSE TO CALL.
HOWEVER, IT IS CLEAR THAT THE
LEADER OUTPERFORMED THE LATEST
POLL PREDICTIONS.VERAGE WITH A
REPORT FROM SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MARTIN SEEMUNGAL.
>> Reporter: IT'S A DEAD HEAT--
BOTH PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU
AND CHALLENGER ISAAC HERZOG
PROJECTED TO WIN 27 SEATS
ACCORDING TO THE FIRST EXIT
POLLS RELEASED TONIGHT.
THE RACE: TOO CLOSE TO CALL, AND
A TOUGH ROAD AHEAD FOR BOTH
CAMPS TO BUILD A MAJORITY
COALITION.
ISRAEL'S LARGELY-CEREMONIAL
PRESIDENT, REUVEN RIVLIN, HAS
THE SERIOUS JOB OF DECIDING
WHICH CANDIDATE WILL GET TO TAKE
THE FIRST SHOT.
WITH HOPES OF A RECORD FOURTH
TERM IN THEALAN BCE, NETANYAHU
CAST HIS VOTE THIS MORNING, IN
JERUSALEM.
HE MADE A LAST-DITCH, ELECTION
DAY PITCH:
>> ( translated ): IN ORDER TO
PREVENT THE LEFT-WING PARTIES
FROM GOVERNING, THERE'S JUST ONE
THING THAT NEEDS TO BE DONE: TO
CLOSE THE GAP BETWEEN LIKUD AND
LABOR AND TO VOTE FOR LIKUD.
>> Reporter: THE LABOR PARTY
STANDARD-BEARER, ISAAC HERZOG,
CAST HIS VOTE IN TEL AVIV, AS
DID HIS ZIONIST UNION COALITION
PARTNER, TZIPI LIVNI.
BY MID MORNING, VOTER TURNOUT
WAS 20% HIGHER THAN THE LAST TWO
PREVIOUS ELECTIONS, A CLEAR
INDICATION THAT ISRAELIS SEE
THIS AS A PIVOTAL ELECTION-A
CLOSE RACE WHERE EVERY SILENG
VOTE WILL COUNT.
GILL GALANOS LIVES ABROAD BUT
CAME BACK TO VOTE.
YOU CAME ALL THE WAY FROM THE
U.S. TO VOTE.
WHY?
>> BECAUSE IT'S IMPORTANT.
IT'S ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
ELECTIONS IN THE PT TWASO
DECADES I WOULD ASSUME, SO I
WANTED MY VOTE TO COUNT.
>> Reporter: AT THIS TEL AVIV
POLLING STATION, ISRAELIS WE
SPOKE TO WERE SPLIT, THE BATTLE
ON THE NATIONAL STAGE IN
MIATUINRE.
SOME VOTED FOR ISAAC HERZOG'S
CENTRE LEFT ALLIANCE...N  ARE TG
ABOUT THE ECONOMIC PRESSURE HERE
EVERYTHING YOU THINK MAYBE THIS
IS A TIME FOR A CHANGE AND WE
>> Reporter: ...OTHERS REFUSING
TO TURN THEIR BACK ON NETANYAHU
AND LIKUD.
>> I AM NOT CHANGE.
Y?WH
BECAUSE I AM STABILITY, AND I AM
LIKUDNIK.
>> Reporter: ALSO VOTING TODAY:
ARAB ISRAELIS, WHO MAKE UP 20%
OF ISRAEL'S POPULATION.
FOUR PARTIES UNITED UNDER A
"JOINT ARAB LIST" HOPING TO GAIN
AS MANY AS 15 OF THE 120 SEATS
IN ISRAEL'S PARLIAMENT, THE
KNESSET.
THEIR FERVOR LED NETANYAHU TO
MAKE A STARK STATEMENT AT MID-
DAY.
VIA SOCIAL MEDIA, HE PLEADED FOR
RIGHT-WING VOTERS TO HEAD TO THE
POLLS.
>> THE RIGHT-WING GOVERNMENT IS
IN DANGER.
ARAB VOTERS ARE GOING TO VOTE IN
DROVES.
LEFT-WING GROUPS ARE BRINGING
THEM IN BUSES!
>> Reporter: THE APPEAL WAS
DENOUNCED AS A DESPERATE ATTEMPT
TO ENSURE REELECTION AND CAME
AMID A SHARP TURN TO THE RIGHT
BY NETANYAHU: YESTERDAY, HE
SEEMINGLY REVERSED YEARS OF
ISRAELI GOVERNMENT COMMITMENT TO
THE EVENTUAL CREATION OF A
PALESTINIAN STATE.
>> Woodruff: MARTIN JOINS ME NOW
FORM LIKUD PARTY HEADQUARTERS IN
TEL AVIV.
WELCOME, MARTIN.
NETANYAHU HAS ALREADY TWEETED
THAT THE LIKUD PARTY HAS WON.
WE KNOW THAT'S IF
THAT'S THE CASE, BUT TRULY HE
CLOSED THE GAP.
IS IT BECAUSE OF HIS TURN TO THE
RIGHT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AND AS YOU CAN HEAR FROM THE
NOISE HERE ATTLEE -- AT LIKUD
HEADQUARTERS, PEOPLE ARE REALLY
CELEBRATING THE FACT HE DID
CLOSE THAT GAP BECAUSE GOING
INTO THE ELECTION, IT DID LOOK
VERY MUCH LIKE IT WOULD BE A WIN
BY ISAAC HERZOG BY AT LEAST FOUR
OR FIVE SEATS.
NETANYAHU HAS CLOSED THAT GAP.
HE GOT THOSE VOTES FROM THE
RIGHT WING, AS YOU KNOW, IN THE
LAST DAYS OF THE ELECTION.
HE MADE A VERY SHARP TURN TO THE
RIGHT HAS THE CAMPAIGN DREW TO A
CLOSE YESTERDAY, SAYING THAT IF
HE BECOMES PRIME MINISTER UNDER
THE PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES, THERE
WILL BE NO PALESTINIAN STATE.
HE TOOK AWAY VOTES FROM THE
JEWISH PARTY.
HE TOOK VOTES AWAY FROM THE
ULTRA NATIONALIST PARTY EVEN
FURTHER TO THE RIGHT.
AS A RESULT HE HAS CLOSED THAT
GAP AND WE NOW HAVE A DEAD HEAT.
>> Woodruff: MARTIN, IT'S A
LITTLE HARD TO HEAR YOU, BUT WE
KNOW THERE'S A LOT GOING ON
THERE AT THE HEADQUARTERS.
WHAT ARE THE OPPOSING ZIONIST
CAMP SAYING?
THEY HAVE TO BE DISAPPOINTED.
>> WELL, THEY AREN'T SHOWING
THEY'RE DISAPPOINTED IF THEY
ARE.
THEY'RE TRYING TO PLAY THE
POSITIVE SIDE, BECAUSE GOING
INTO THIS ELECTION, WHEN IT WAS
FIRST ANNOUNCED, THEY ONLY HAD
13 SEATS.
AND ACCORDING TO THESE EXIT
POLLS, THEY'RE GOING TO END UP
WITH 27.
THEY ARE SAYING THAT IT'S
PREMATURE FOR BENJAMIN NETANYAHU
TO BE DECLARING VICTORY, AND
OBVIOUSLY IN THE DAYS AHEAD
THEY'RE GOING TO BE LOOKING TO
FIGURE IN SOME KIND OF COALITION
GOVERNMENT.
>> Woodruff: TELL US ABOUT
WHAT DOES HAPPEN NEXT.
WHERE DOES ISRAELI POLITICS GO
FROM HERE?
HOW DO THEY PUT THIS NEXT
GOVERNMENT TOGETHER?
>> WELL, THAT'S GOING TO BE A
REAL KEY HERE.
THE PRESIDENT OF ISRAEL, WHO
WILL ULTIMATELY ASK ONE OF THE
LEADERS TO FORM HIS COALITION OR
TRY FORM A COALITION, HAS SAID
IN A STATEMENT HE'D LIKE TO SEE
A UNITY GOVERNMENT.
WE'RE HEARING THAT NEITHER SIDE
OFF THE TOP IS GOING TO GO FOR A
UNITY GOVERNMENT.
BOTH WILL DO THEIR BEST TO TRY
TO FORM SO KIND OF COALITION ON
THEIR OWN.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU IS LOOKING
TOWARD HIS FORMER MINISTER IN
HIS CABINET WHO LEFT HIS PARTY
BECAUSE HE WASN'T GIVEN THE
FINANCE MINISTRY.
THEY HAVE A HISTORY.
THERE'S A LOT OF DISTRUST TOWARD
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, BUT HE'S
SEEN AS SOMEONE TO LOOK AT.
OBVIOUSLY ISAAC HERZOG WILL GO
AFTER HATNUAH.
HE'S A RIGHT WING THEY'RE COMES
FROM LIKUD.
HE ONLY LEFT TWO YEARS AGO.
THE QUESTION IS WILL HE TAKE
PART IN A COALITION THAT COULD
SUPPORT THE ARAB UNITY PARTY
THAT DID SO WELL TODAY AND IS
NOW THE THIRD LARGEST PARTY.
IT WILL BE VERY INTERESTING TO
SEE HOW THIS PLAYS OUT IN THE
DAYS AHEAD.
>> Woodruff: SO IN THE END,
MARTIN, WE KNOW THE ECONOMY WAS
AN ISSUE.
CLEARLY PEACE.
SECURITY WAS AN ISSUE.
IS THERE A SENSE... DO YOU HAVE
A SENSE OF WHICH WAS MORE
IMPORTANT TO VOTERS IN THE END?
>> WELL, IN THE END IT HAS TO BE
SAID IT WAS THE ECONOMY, BECAUSE
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU IS PUSHING
THAT SECURITY LINE.
SECURITY, VOTE FOR ME, YOU'LL BE
SAFE.
SO HE WAS RUNNING COMMERCIALS
SAYING HE WAS THE BIBI-SITTER, A
PLAY ON HIS NAME, BIBI NETANYAHU
PEOPLE USE.
BUT CLEARLY VOTERS DIDN'T WANT
TO TALK ABOUT SECURITY.
THEY WANTED TO TALK ABOUT THE
HOUSING CRISIS AND THE HIGH COST
OF LIVING.
IN THE END THAT'S WHAT BASICALLY
GAVE NETANYAHU A HARD TIME.
AND HE FOUGHT FOR HIS POLITICAL
LIFE AND MADE ALL THESE
STATEMENTS THAT VERY SHARP TURN
TO THE RIGHT.
THAT REALLY IS WHAT MANY PEOPLE
SAY SAVED HIS SKIN.
IF IT WASN'T FOR, THAT WE
WOULDN'T HAVE THE CLOSE RACE
THAT WE HAVE TODAY.
>> Woodruff: MARTIN SEEMUNGAL
REPORTING FROM A VERY LOUD LIKUD
HEADQUARTERS THERE IN TEL AVIV.
WE THANK YOU, MARTIN.
>> Ifill: A NEW BUDGET PLAN
RELEASED TODAY BY HOUSE
REPUBLICANS REVEALS THE YAWNING
PARTISAN CHASM THAT STILL EXISTS
WHEN IT COMES TO TAXES AND
SPENDING, AS THE G.O.P. PUSHES
FOR DEEP CUTS AND A BALANCED
BUDGET, AND DEMOCRATS SAY THE
BUDGET NEEDS TO GROW.
AS ALWAYS, THE CHOICES ARE NOT
THAT SIMPLE.
JOINING ME WITH THE STORY OF THE
POLICIES AND PRIORITIES BEHIND
THE BUDGET DEBATE IS NEWSHOUR
POLITICAL EDITOR LISA
DESJARDINS.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US AGAIN,
LEE CENTENNIAL PARK AND MAYBE
YOU CONNECTS PLAIN THIS FOR US.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT $5 TRILLION
IN SAVINGS IN THIS PROPOSED
BUDGET THAT THE HOUSE LEADERS
PUT OUT TODAY.
WHAT DOES THAT REPRESENT?
>> $5 TRILLION IN SAVINGS IS
OVER TEN YEARS.
THAT REPRESENTS TWO PRIORITIES
FOR REPUBLICANS.
WHAT THEY ARE CHOOSING WITH THIS
BUDGET, LET'S PUT IT SIMPLY, IS
THEY'RE CHOOSING TO TRY TO PAY
DOWN THE DEBT.
THEY WOULD BALANCE THE BUDGET IN
A REMARKABLE NINE YEARS,
ESPECIALLY IT'S TEN YEARS, AND
THE OTHER PRIORITY THEY'RE
CHOOSING IS DEFENSE.
EVEN AS THEY'RE PAYING DOWN THE
DEFICIT AND THE DEBT ULTIMATELY,
THEY ALSO ARE INCREASING
SPENDING FOR DEFENSE.
THAT'S LIKE TRYING DIG A HOLE
EVEN AS YOU'RE PUTTING MORE DIRT
IN IT.
IT'S VERY AMBITIOUS.
BECAUSE THOSE ARE THEIR
PRIORITIES, THIS WOULD MEAN
DRAMATIC CUTS FOR EVERYONE ELSE,
FOR DISCRETIONARY FUNDING, WHICH
MEANS MOST OF GOVERNMENT.
VERY HARD TO SEE THESE FUNDING
TAKING PLACE WITHOUT GOVERNMENT
LAYOFFS.
>> Ifill: THAT KIND OF
AUSTERITY THEY'RE CALLING FOR,
THE PRESIDENT CAME OUT AND SAID,
WE NEED INFRASTRUCTURE, WE NEED
TO SPEND ON ALL THESE THINGS,
AND, BY THE WAY, THE ECONOMY IS
DOING BETTER NOW, THERE WON'T BE
AN APPETITE FOR IT.
DOES HE HAVE A POINT?
>> THE DEMOCRATS ARE GOING TO
COME BACK AGAIN AND SAY, LOOK AT
WHAT WE'VE DONE.
WE'VE ALREADY CUT THE DEFICIT BY
TREMENDOUS AMOUNTS.
THIS IS OVERREACH BY
REPUBLICANS.
THEY'RE NOT LOOKING AT WHAT
AMERICA WANTS.
DEMOCRATS WANT AMERICA WANTS
JOBS.
THEY'RE NOT WORRIED ABOUT THE
DEBT AS MUCH.
I THINK THAT'S THE DEBATE THAT
WILL PLAY OUT.
NOTHING EVERYTHING IS POLITICAL,
BUT THERE ARE A LOT OF POLITICS
IN THIS DOCUMENT.
THEY'RE CALCULATING THAT THEIR
CORE, THEIR REPUBLICAN BASE
STILL CARES SO MUCH ABOUT THE
DEBT THAT IT'S WORTH PROPOSING
THESE VERY STRONG CUTS, NOT ONLY
TO AGENCIES, BUT ALSO PELL
GRANTS, FOR EXAMPLE, WOULD HAVE
SORT OF LESS STABLE FUNDING
UNDER THIS PLAN.
>> Ifill: DOES THE BUDGET
PROCESS ITSELF, AND THAT WORD
"PROCESS" ALWAYS PUTS PEOPLE
OFF, BUT IT SEEMS THERE IS A
REASON THESE KINDS OF PRIORITIES
ARE PUT FORWARD IN A BUDGET
PROPOSAL, ESPECIALLY ONE THAT WE
ROUTINELY SAY MAY NOT GO AS FAR
AS THEY'D LIKE.
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE FOR PUTTING
THIS STUFF IN A BUDGET PROPOSAL?
>> I CAN SEE OUR VIEWERS SAYING,
WHY ARE THEY EVEN TALKING ABOUT
THIS?
IT ISN'T A BINDING.
BUT THIS IS A SHOW OF WHAT
REPUBLICANS' PRIORITIES ARE.
THIS IS THEIR ONE CHANCE IN A
GRIDLOCKED CONGRESS TO SAY,
HERE'S WHAT WE STAND FOR, AND
HERE'S WHY IT'S ESPECIALLY
SIGNIFICANT, A BUDGET FALLS
UNDER SPECIAL RULES IN CONGRESS.
YOU CAN GET A BUDGET THROUGH THE
SENATE WITH A MAGICAL 51 VOTES
INSTEAD OF 60 VOTES, AND
REPUBLICANS ARE GOING TO LATCH
ON TO THAT ONE THING THEY HAVE
IN THIS BUDGET THAT IS MAJOR
POLICY PRIORITY, THE REPEAL OF
SOMETHING CALLED OBAMACARE.
>> Ifill: I WANTED TO ASK YOU
ABOUT, THAT BECAUSE THIS
PROPOSAL, IN ORDER FOR IT TO
BALANCE OUT, YOU WOULD HAVE TO
REPEAL OBAMACARE BUT CUT BACK
THE DODD-FRANK FINANCIAL REFORM
LEGISLATION IN PLACE, THAT
DOESN'T SOUND LIKE ANYTHING
THAT'S GOING TO BE BIPARTISAN.
>> NO, IT'S NOT GOING TO BE
BIPARTISAN, BUT THEY KNOW THE
ONLY WAY THEY'LL GET A REPEAL OF
BOTH OF THOSE THROUGH THE SENATE
IS TO ATTACH IT TO THE BUDGET
AND GO THROUGH THAT SPECIAL
BUDGET RULE THAT LETS YOU PASS
THINGS WITH 51 VOTES.
EVERYONE KNOWS THE PRESIDENT
WILL STILL VETO THAT POLICY IF
IT COMES TO HIS DESK, BUT THEY
WANT TO MAKE A STATEMENT HERE.
THEY WANT TO HAVE BOTH CHAMBERS
TRY AND PASSES THIS.
>> Ifill: THE ONE THING BOTH
SIDES AGREE THEY DON'T WANT TO
CUT IS DEFENSE SPENDING.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THE DEFENSE AGENCY, PENTAGON,
ANYTHING TO DO WITH DEFENSE,
WHICH IS NOT JUST THE PENTAGON,
DOES WELL IN THIS BUDGET.
ONE THING TO WATCH FOR IN THIS
BUDGET IS THEY'VE INCREASED
FUNDING TO A FUND THAT'S JUST
FOR WAR CONTINGENCY SPENDING.
SOME PEOPLE CALL THAT A SLUSH
FUND.
THE PENTAGON SAYS IT'S A FUND
THAT'S IMPORTANT.
BUT IT DEALS WITH HOW THE
PENTAGON OPERATES ON FOREIGN
SOIL FIGHTING TERROR AND
REPUBLICANS HAVE INCREASED THAT
FUND.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE FOLLOWING.
THIS I KNOW YOU WILL.
>> OH, YEAH, I LOVE IT.
>> Ifill: I KNOW YOU DO.
LISA DESJARDINS, THANKS.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, THE RISK OF
CONCUSSIONS IN SPORTS AND TRYING
TO LOWER THOSE ODDS.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS LINEBACKER
CHRIS BORLAND SHOCKED THE
FOOTBALL WORLD YESTERDAY BY
ANNOUNCING HIS DECISION TO
RETIRE FROM THE GAME AFTER A
STRONG ROOKIE SEASON.
BORLAND, WHO IS 24 YEARS OLD AND
WAS EXPECTED TO EARN MORE THAN A
HALF-MILLION DOLLARS NEXT
SEASON, TOLD ESPN'S "OUTSIDE THE
LINES" HE WAS CONCERNED ABOUT
HEAD TRAUMA FROM REPEATED HITS.
>> IT WAS JUST THE REALIZATION,
I JUST STARTED MY PROFESSIONAL
CAREER.
AM I GOING TO GO DOWN THIS ROAD?
AM I GOING TO COMMIT THE PRIME
OF MY LIFE TO SOMETHING THAT
COULD ULTIMATELY BE DETRIMENTAL
TO MY HEALTH?
THAT JUST KIND OF TRIGGERED MY
THINKING AND CHANGED THE WAY I
VIEWED THE RISKS.
>> Woodruff: BORLAND BECOMES THE
MOST PROMINENT PLAYER TO LEAVE
THE GAME IN HIS PRIME BASED ON
THOSE RISKS.
BUT WORRIES ARE GROWING AMONG
MANY PARENTS OF YOUNGER ATHLETES
AND KIDS PLAYING SPORTS.
RESEARCHERS ARE LOOKING INTO
WHETHER ELECTRONICS CAN MAKE
SPORTS SAFER.
HARI SREENIVASAN REPORTS ON NEW
INNOVATIONS FOR BRAIN SAFETY ON
THE PLAYING FIELD, PART OF OUR
CONTINUING SERIES ON
BREAKTHROUGHS.
>> Sreenivasan: CONTACT SPORTS
LIKE HOCKEY CAN BE BRUTAL.
19-YEAR-OLD OLIVER BECH-HANSEN
DESCRIBES GETTING HIT SO HARD HE
LOST HIS MEMORY.
>> IT TOOK ME A COUPLE WEEKS
BEFORE I FINALLY-- I SLOWLY
STARTED REMEMBERING THINGS THAT
HAPPENED.
>> Sreenivasan: AS THE SPOTLIGHT
ON CONCUSSIONS AND HEAD TRAUMA
INTENSIFIES, PARENTS, COACHES,
AND MEDICAL PROFESSIONALS ARE
DEBATING HOW TO KEEP PLAYERS
SAFE, AND SOME ARE LOOKING TO
TECHNOLOGY.
THE JERSEY WILDCATS, A LEAGUE OF
16 TO 20-YEAR-OLDS, HAVE BEEN
EXPERIMENTING WITH A HEAD IMPACT
DEVICE DONATED BY REEBOK.
THE DEVICE, CALLED CHECKLIGHT,
IS WORN UNDER THE HELMET AND
FEATURES AN LED LIGHT ON THE
BACK OF THEECK  NTHAT FLASHES IF
A PLAYER TAKES A BIG BLOW.
PAUL LITCHFIELD FROM REEBOK
EXPLAINS.
>> SO THE CHECKLIGHT WILL
ACTUALLY FIT INSIDE OF THE
SKULLCAP, AND IT SLIDES INSIDE A
LITTLE SLEEVE, AND THE DEVICE IS
IN HERE, THE ELECTRONICS ARE
RIGHT HERE BEHIND YOUR EAR.
WE CAN ACTUALLY IDENTIFY NINE
LOCATIONS AROUND THE HEAD, AND
IDENTIFY THE FORCE OF IMPACT
FROM THOSE NINE LOCATIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE IMPACT
DEVICE CAN BE WORN UNDER ANY
TYPE OF SPORTS HELMET, BUT IT
WILL NOT DETERMINE IF A PLAYER
HAS SUFFERED A CONCUSSION.
>> IT DOES NOT INDICATE ANYTHING
ABOUT YOUR LEVEL OF INJURY.
IT INDICATES YOUR LEVEL OF
IMPACT, AND BY DOING THAT IT'S
UP TO THE ATHLETE, THE COACH,
THEIR PLAYERS, THEIR TEAMMATES,
TO JUST MAKE SE YOURU CHECK IN,
AND YOU SAY HEY, YOU OKAY, AND
YOU DO AN ASSESSMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: WILDCATS COACH
JUSTIN STANLICK CALLS IT AN
EXTRA PAIR OF EYES.
>> THERE'S SO MUCH GOING ON, YOU
CAN BE DISTRACTED, OR HUNG UP ON
ONE POINT, TURN AROUND, AND
BEFORE YOU KNOW IT YOUR PLAYER
IS DOWN, AND YOU'RE NOT EXACTLY
SURE WHAT HAPPENED.
YOU KNOW, TWELVE PLAYERS ON THE
ICE, IT'S VERY EASY TO MISS
SOMETHING.
>> IT'S SIMPLE.
IT'S LIKE A TRAFFIC SIGNAL,
GREEN, YELLOW, RED, AND AT A
TRAFFIC SIGNAL GREEN IS GO,
YELLOW IS CAUTION, RED IS STOP.
>> HAD I A LITTLE HIT TO THE
HEAD, BUT I DIDN'T EVEN REALIZE,
LIKE I DIDN'T THINK ANYTHING OF
IT UNTIL ONE OF MY BUDDIES TOLD
ME THAT I HAD A YELLOW LIGHT ON
THE BACK.
I WAS LIKE, OH, WOW.
>> Sreenivasan: NEUROSURGEON
ROBERT CANTU IS AN EXPERT IN
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY AMONG
ATHLETES.
>> THOSE VIOLENT SHAKINGS OF THE
BRAIN THAT DON'T NECESSARILY
PRODUCE SYMPTOMS RIGHT AWAY THAT
ARE RECOGNIZABLE AS CONCUSSIONS,
IF TAKEN OVER A LONG PERIOD OF
TIME, CAN LEAD TO LATER LIFE
NEURO-DEGENERATIVE PROBLEMS.
>> Sreenivasan: CHECKLIGHT IS
NOT THE ONLY IMPACT SENSOR.
>> THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS
THERE'S BEEN A PLETHORA OF
DIFFERENT SENSORS THAT HAVE COME
OUT, SOME OF THEM ARE WITHIN A
HELMET, SOME OF THEM ARE ON
HEADBANDS, SOME OF THEM ARE ON
CHINSTRAPS, SOME OF THEM ARE
EVEN IN MOUTH GUARDS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE REEBOK
DEVICE HAS FIELD EXPERIENCE
BEHIND IT.
FORMER NFL PLAYER ISAIAH
KACYVENSKI OVERSEES CONSUMER
BUSINESS AT MC10, THE
ELECTRONICS COMPANY THAT HELPED
CREATE CHECKLIGHT.
IN THE NFL, KACYVENSKI SUFFERED
SEVEN CONCUSSIONS AND UPON
RETIREMENT BECAME A VOCAL
ADVOCATE FOR HEAD TRAUMA SAFETY.
HE WAS ONE OF THE FIRST NFL
BRAIN FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH.
>> I KNEW THAT IN MY HEART AND
MY MIND THAT THE SPORT NEEDS TO
GET SAFER IN A LOT OF DIFFERENT
WAYS.
>> Sreenivasan: KACYVENSKI SAYS
CHECKLIGHT GIVES BOTH PLAYERS
AND COACHES AN OBJECTIVE
MEASUREMENT.
>> IT TAKES IT OUT OF THE HANDS
OF THE ATHLETES IN A LOT OF
DIFFERENT WAYS, WHICH IS, AT
TIMES WHEN I WAS HIT, AND I
DIDN'T NECESSARILY WANT TO PULL
MYSELF OUT OF THE GAME, I DIDN'T
WANT TO LOOK SOFT.
IT FELT ALMOST LIKE I WAS BEING
LESS OF A MAN IF I ADMITTED TO
BEING HIT IN THE HEAD.
>> Sreenivasan: EDDIE PAVLINI
SEES THE SAME SCENARIO PLAY OUT
ON THE ICE.
>> A LOT OF TIMES KIDS MIGHT
JUST NOT SAY ANYTHING AND TRY TO
PLAY THROUGH IT, AND THEY'LL
ONLY GET CHECKED OUT IF THE
COACH NOTICES IT.
>> YOU CAN ASK A 17-YEAR-OLD HOW
ARE YOU FEELING, AND HAVE THEM
CHECKED OUT BY AN E.M.T., BUT
SOMETIMES THEY'RE NOT ALWAYS
TRUTHFUL BECAUSE THEY DON'T WANT
TO COME OUT OF A GAME.
>> Sreenivasan: LITCHFIELD SAYS
HIS TEAM CONDUCTED 15,000 DROP
TESTS TO ARRIVE AT THE RIGHT
MEASUREMENTS.
>> WE ACTUALLY CHOSE VALUES THAT
ARE BASED OFF THE NATIONAL
SAFETY TRANSPORTATI BOAONRD, A
THING CALLED THE H.I.C., WHICH
IS HEAD INJURY CRITERIA VALUES.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT WHILE DR.
CANTU IS SUPPORTIVE OF THE
AWARENESS CHECKLIGHT AND OTHER
SENSORS BRING, HE IS CAUTIOUS
ABOUT THEIR RESEARCH.
>> THE VARIOUS DIFFERENT SENSOR
DEVICES THAT ARE IN A LOT OF
DIFFERENT PRODUCTS RIGHT NOW
HAVE ONLY BEEN VALIDATED WITHIN
THEIR OWN INSTITUTIONS, WITHIN
THEIR OWN COMPANIES, THEY
HAVEN'T BEEN VALIDATED BY
INDEPENDENT, THIRD PARTY
LABORATORIES.
SO THE ACCURACY OF THESE VARIOUS
RECORDING DEVICES IS SOMETHING
OF CONCERN.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW HARD A
PLAYER IS HIT ISN'T ALWAYS THE
MOST RELEVANT INFORMATION.
OFTEN IT'S THE SECOND OR THIRD
HARD HIT THAT CAN CAUSE THE MOST
DAMAGE.
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S A SILVER
BULLET IN TERMS OF TRYING TO
PREVENT CONCUSSION, OR
RECOGNIZING CONCUSSION.
I THINK IT'S A TOOL IN TERMS OF
ALLOWING YOU AT LEAST TO KNOW
HOW MANY HITS A YOUNGSTER HAS
HAD.
>> Sreenivasan: ISAIAH
KACYVENSKI BELIEVES HE IS
ALREADY FEELING THE DAMAGE FROM
MULTIPLE HITS TO THE HEAD.
KACYVENSKI ATTENDED HARVARD AS
AN UNDERGRADUATE, THEN PLAYED
SEVEN YEARS IN THE NFL.
WHEN HE RETURNED TO HARVARD FOR
HIS MASTER IN BUSINESS, HE FOUND
IT MUCH HARDER TO STUDY.
>> I COULDN'T GO THROUGH AND
JUST CHURN THROUGH FIVE HOURS AT
A IME,T AND CRANK THROUGH, I HAD
TO TAKE BITES, GO OVER IT AGAIN,
TAKES BITES, GO OVER IT AGAIN,
TAKE BITES, WHICH IS TOUGH.
RECALIBRATE.
>> Sreenivasan: STILL A LOVER OF
THE SPORT, KACYVENSKI WILL START
COACHING HIS 11-YEAR-OLD SON
ISAIAH JUNIOR IN TACKLE FOOTBALL
NEXT FALL.
HE SAYS HE IS FOCUSED ON KEEPING
THE GAME SAFE WITH PROPER
TECHNIQUES AND CHECKLIGHT.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN WITH THE
PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THESE NEXT FEW WEEKS
ARE ANXIOUS ONES FOR MANY HIGH
SCHOOL SENIORS, AND THEIR
PARENTS.
IT'S WHEN THEY FIND OUT IF
THEY'VE BEEN ACCEPTED TO THE
COLLEGES OR UNIVERSITIES ON
THEIR WISH LIST.
BUT THE AUTHOR OF A NEW BOOK
ARGUES THAT ALL THE BLOOD, SWEAT
AEAFFREY BROWN TAKES A LOOK.
>> Brown: WHERE DID YOU GO TO
COLLEGE?
AND MORE TO THE POINT, FOR MANY
YOUNG PEOPLE NOW AWAITING
DECISION, WHERE DO YOU HOPE TO
GO, AND HOW MUCH DO YOU HAVE
RIDING ON IT?
A NEW BOOK ENTITLED: "WHERE
YOU'LL GO IS NOT WHO YOU'LL BE,"
PROPOSES THE WHOLE COLLEGE
ADMISSIONS PROJECT IS OUT OF
WHACK AND EVEN THAT REJECTION IS
A WONDERFUL THING.
ITS AUTHOR IS "NEW YORK TIMES"
COLUMNIST FRANK BRUNI, WHO, FOR
THE RECORD, ATTENDED THE
UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA.
SO MADNESS, NONSENSE, THOSE ARE
JUST SOME OF THE WORDS YOU USE
FOR WHAT YOU SEE AS A BROKEN
SYSTEM.
WHAT'S THE BRUNT OF THE
ARGUMENT?
WHAT HAPPENED TO OUR SYSTEM IN.
>> WHAT HAPPENED TO OUR SYSTEM
IS WE BECAME BRAND OBSESSEDMENT
WE BECAME CONVINCED OR PARENTS
DID THAT IF THEIR KIDS DIDN'T
GET INTO THE RIGHT COLLEGES THEY
WOULDN'T HAVE AS BRIGHT FUTURES,
THEY WOULDN'T MAKE AS MUCH
MONEY.
WE SOMEHOW BOUGHT THAT THIS
MOMENT IN LATE MARCH, EARLY
APRIL WHEN YOU FIND OUT WHERE
YOU'RE GOING TO GO TO SCHOOL
SETS THE WHOLE TRAJECTORY FOR
YOUR LIFE.
AND IT'S SO UNTRUE AND IT'S THE
SOURCE OF SO MUCH UNNECESSARY
ANXIETY.
THAT'S WHAT I GO INTO IN THE
BOOK.
>> Brown: WITH WHAT RESULT?
WHAT HAS IT DONE TO YOUNG
PEOPLE?
WHAT HAS IT DONE TO OUR
COLLEGES?
>> IT STARTS WITH WHAT WE'VE
DONE TO YOUNG PEOPLE.
IT HAD DRIVEN THEM MAD IN HIGH
SCHOOL.
YOU SEE RATES OF DEPRESSION AND
MEDICATION WE DIDN'T SEE BEFORE.
IT'S ALSO TAUGHT THEM A VERY
CURIOUS SET OF VALUES.
WE'RE TELLING THEM THAT GETTING
INTO THE DOOR OF SOMETHING, THAT
BREECHING THE INNER SANCTUM IS
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING.
ONE OF MY BIGGEST CONCERNS IS
THAT THEY GET TO COLLEGE AND
THEY DON'T REALIZE THAT WHAT
MATTERS IS WHAT THEY DO THERE,
NOT THE NAME TO ON THE DIPLOMA.
THAT'S A BIG CONCERN.
MICHAEL>> Brown: THE PERPETRATOE
WIDESPREAD IN YOUR BOOK,
COLLEGES FOR PUTTING THE BRAND,
THE SELECTIVITY, PARENTS FOR
SOMEHOW GETTING THIS IDEA THAT
THEY MUST GET THEIR KIDS INTO
THE BEST SCHOOLS.
>> YEAH.
WELL, I'M REALLY GLAD YOU
MENTIONED THE COLLEGES
THEMSELVES, BECAUSE THEY ARE
CULPRITS HERE.
COLLEGES HAVE BECOME BUSINESSES
THAT MARKET THEMSELVES
AGGRESSIVELY, SEND OUT MORE
INFORMATION.
I TALKED IN THE BOOK ABOUT IVORY
TOWER PORN.
THEY ARE TRYING TO BOOST THE
NUMBER OF APPLICANTS THEY GET TO
THEIR SCHOOLS SO THEY CAN --
IT'S REALLY PERVERSE.
THEY WANT THE ABLEY CANNES TO
REJECT A GIVEN NUMBER AND HAVE A
LOW ACCEPTANCE RATE.
THAT'S FED THIS WHOLE IDEA YOU
WANT TO GO TO THE MOST SELECTIVE
SCHOOL.
EVERYTHING FEEDS INTO EVERYTHING
ELSE AND YOU END UP WITH THIS
SYSTEM THAT AS YOU SAID EARLIER
IS OUT OF WHACK.
>> Brown: I WANT TO PLAY A
LITTLE CLIP.
WE WENT OUT TO SOME LOCAL COOLS.
-- SCHOOLS.
THIS IS A YOUNG WOMAN FROM HIGH
SCHOOL IN MARYLAND IN THE
APPLICATION PROCESS NOW.
>> I PITY HER.
>> I'M A NETWORKING PERSON, SO I
KNOW HOW TO TALK TO PEOPLE, AND
WHEN THEY HEAR YOU'VE GONE TO
CERTAIN SCHOOLS OR DONE CERTAIN
THINGS WITH THE PEOPLE AT THESE
SCHOOLS, IT ALSO MAKES A BIG
DIFFERENCE.
>> Brown: SO YOU HEAR THAT A
LOT, RIGHT?
NETWORKING.
YOU GO TO CERTAIN SCHOOLS, IT
MAKES A DIFFERENCE.
ARE YOU SAYING SHE'S COMPLETELY
WRONG?
>> NO, SHE'S NOT COMPLETELY
WRONG.
THERE ARE WAYS IN WHICH THE
CERTAIN SCHOOLS FEED CERTAIN
INDUSTRIES, FOR EXAMPLE, BUT
WHAT I'M SAYING IS THAT THINKING
IS VERY FLAWED IN ITS
NARROWNESS.
IN THE BOOK I PRESENT STORIES OF
A LOT OF PEOPLE WE RESPECT
GREATLY, GREAT BUSINESS LEADERS,
ARTIST, POLITICIANS WHO HAVE HAD
THE MOST BRILLIANT CAREERS
IMAGINABLE, AND THEY'VE GOTTEN
THERE THROUGH A VARIETY OF
SCHOOLS, INCLUDE MANAGE STATE
SCHOOLS.
WHAT I'M SAYING IS TO THINK IT
ALL HINGES ON THAT NETWORK
YOU'RE GOING TO GET AT AN IVY
LEAGUE SCHOOL IS NOT TRUE.
THERE ARE SO MANY DIFFERENT
PATHS TO BRILLIANT CAREERS AND
GREAT SUCCESS, AND THE BELIEVE
THERE ARE ONLY A FEW IS TO
SHORTCHANGE YOURSELF AND
SHORTCHANGE THE COLLEGE
EXPERIENCE YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
IF YOU DON'T END UP AT ONE OF
THOSE FEW PLACES.
>> THAT GOES TO WHAT I SAID IN
OUR INTRODUCTION.
IF YOU'RE TELLING PEOPLE THAT
REJECTION MAY END UP BEING A
GOOD THING, IF YOU DO CITE A LOT
OF EXAMPLES, BUT IS THAT WHAT
YOU WOULD SAY TO YOUNG PEOPLE?
IT'S OKAY TO BE REJECTED OR
DON'T AIM THAT HIGH.
WHAT EXACTLY DO YOU TELL THEM?
>> I WOULD TELL THEM IT'S OKAY
TO BE REJECTED FOR MANY REASON,
ONE OF WHICH IS THROUGH THAT
EXPERIENCE YOU LEARN A TALENT
MORE IMPORTANT THAN ANYTHING
ELSE, WHICH IS RESILIENCE.
MOST OF LIFE IS ABOUT REBOUNDING
FROM MISTAKES, REBOUNDING FROM
FAILURES, REBOUNDING FROM
DISAPPOINTMENTS, AND TO HAVE
THAT HAPPEN TO YOU, WHEN YOU'RE
17 OR 18, AND TO MASTER IT, I
MEAN, THAT'S AN INCREDIBLE GIFT.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER REASONS WHY
IT'S GOOD FOR YOU, TOO, NOT
NECESSARILY GOOD FOR YOU, BUT
NOT BAD FOR YOU.
THERE IS NO ONE SCHOOL THAT'S
GOING TO BE RIGHT FOR YOU.
THERE ARE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS
OF SCHOOLS, AND SOMETIMES KIDS
WHO ARE REJECTED FROM THEIR TOP
CHOICES AND END UP AT THEIR
SECOND OR THIRD CHOICES OR FIFTH
CHOICES APPROACH THOSE SCHOOLS
WITH AN APPETITE AND WITH AN
INSISTENCE ON GETTING A GOOD
EDUCATION THAT LEADS THEM TO A
BETTER EDUCATION THAN THEY MIGHT
HAVE GOTTEN AT THEIR TOP CHOICE.
KIDS WHO GET INTO THEIR TOP
CHOICE SOMETIMES THINK, OKAY, MY
WORK IS DONE AND NOW I HAVE IT
MADE, WHICH IS NOT TRUE.
KIDS WHO GET INTO THEIR SIXTH
CHOICE OFTEN GO THERE AND THINK,
OKAY, I'M GOING TO MAKE UP FOR
WHAT I LOST, EVEN THOUGH THEY
HAVEN'T LOST THAT MUCH, I'M
GOING TO ATTACK THIS WITH A
ZEAL, AND THAT ENDS UP BEING
CRUCIAL.
>> Brown: WE ARE AT A TIME
WHEN COLLEGE IS SO EXPENSIVE.
YOU AND I HAVE TALKED ABOUT
THIS.
COLLEGE IS SO EXPENSIVE.
JOBS ARE VERY HARD TO COME BY.
HOW DO YOU MAKE THIS CASE TO
EVERYBODY TO KIND OF CALM DOWN
IN A SENSE WHEN THE STAKES SEEM
SO MUCH HIGHER, WHEN THE
PRESSURE ON EVERYBODY IS SO MUCH
GREATER?
>> WELL, BECAUSE WHAT I EXPLORE
AND EXPLAIN AND I THINK I ARGUE
SUCCESSFULLY IN THE BOOK IS THE
STAKES ARE NOT AS HIGH AS YOU
THINK THEY'RE GOING TO BE, THE
STAKES MEANING WHERE YOU GO TO
COLLEGE.
YOU MENTIONED MONEY, WHICH I'M
REALLY GLAD YOU DID.
WE HAVE WONDERFUL STATE SCHOOLS
THROUGHOUT THIS COUNTRY AND
MANY, MANY OF THEM HAVE THESE
AMAZING HONORS PROGRAMS.
THE KIDS AREN'T EVEN AWARE OF
THIS.
YOU CAN GO TO A SCHOOL LIKE
ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY, AND IF
YOU'RE AN EXEMPLARY STUDENT, YOU
CAN END UP IN THE HONORS
COLLEGE.
THERE YOU WILL HAVE AN
EXPERIENCE THAT IS COMMENSURATE
WITH THE BEST EDUCATION ANYWHERE
ELSE.
YOU WILL GRADUATE HAVING PAID A
LOT LESS MONEY AND YOU'RE MUCH
LESS LIKELY TO HAVE DEBT, AND
THAT HAS MEANING.
SO I THINK WE NEED TO THINK
ABOUT EXPENSE AND HAVE KIDS LOOK
AT STATE SCHOOLS, NOT WITH THE
DISDAIN SAYING, THOSE DON'T HAVE
THE SNOB APPEAL OF ANOTHER
SCHOOL, BUT SAYING THESE ARE
REALLY GREAT VALUES AND THAT
MAKES A DIFFERENCE.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT.
THE BOOK IS "WHERE YOU'LL GO IS
NOT WHO YOU'LL BE."
FRANK BRUNI, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: YOU CAN SEE MORE OF
JEFF'S CONVERSATION WITH FRANK
BRUNI WHEN THEY DISCUSS THE
EXTREME MEASURES SOME STUDENTS
TAKE TO MAKE THEIR APPLICATIONS
STANDOUT AT PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: NOW, TO A PROMISING
MEDICAL STORY IN THE CONTINUING
FIGHT AGAINST CANCER.
IT'S ABOUT A BIG CHANGE IN THE
WORLD OF ONCOLOGY: THESE DAYS,
THERE'S GROWING INTEREST, BETTER
RESULTS AND MORE PHARMACEUTICAL
DOLLARS TO DEVELOP
IMMUNOTHERAPY, OR USING ONE'S
IMMUNE SYSTEM TO ATTACK CANCER
CELLS.
IT'S BEEN A LONG ROAD TO GET TO
THIS POINT.
FOR DECADES, RESEARCHERS HAVE
TRIED TO FIND A WAY TO MAKE THIS
KIND OF TREATMENT WORK FOR
PATIENTS.
AND NOW ONCOLOGISTS BELIEVE THEY
ARE TURNING A CORNER.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JACKIE
JUDD HAS OUR REPORT ABOUT ONE
INTRIGUING APPROACH IN
PHILADELPHIA.
>> Reporter: THIS IS YOUR FIRST
LOOK?
>> YES, IT IS.
>> Reporter: IF BUILDINGS TELL A
STORY, THE STORY HERE IS ONE OF
PROGRESS.
DR. CARL JUNE LEADS THE TEAM
RESPONSIBLE FOR A PROMISING
TRIAL IN WHICH THE BODY'S IMMUNE
SYSTEM IS TURNED INTO A CANCER-
FIGHTING WEAPON.
HE AND A ONCE-SMALL GROUP OF
RESEARCHERS BEGAN WORK IN A
CLOSET-SIZED SPACE, BUT SOON
WILL HAVE TWO FLOORS OF WHAT
WILL BE A STATE-OF-THE-ART
BUILDING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA.
AND THIS WILL BE THE LARGEST
GROUP OF PEOPLE WORKING ON
IMMUNOTHERAPY IN AN INSTITUTION?
>> OH, YEA, WE THINK BY FAR ITS
THE LARGEST GROUP IN THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: HERE IS WHY.
SINCE 2010, A GROUP OF CHILDREN
AND ADULTS, SUFFERING FROM
LEUKEMIA AND RUNNING OUT OF
TREATMENT OPTIONS, HA BEEVEN IN
AN EXPERIMENTAL TRIAL IN WHICH
THEIR IMMUNE SYSTEM CELLS WERE
GENETICALLY MODIFIED TO KILL
CANCER.
IT IS AN APPROACH OTHER
INSTITUTIONS ARE PURSUING, AS
WELL.
THE FIRST RESULTS AT PENN
STARTLED EVEN DR. JUNE.
>> THE ACTUAL TRUTH IS OUR FIRST
PATIENT, I GOT AN EMAIL FROM OUR
PHYSICIAN, THAT THE LEUKEMIA
BIOPSY CAME BACK WITH NO MORE
LEUKEMIA, MY ACTUAL RESPONSE TO
HIM WAS I DON'T BELIEVE IT.
SO THEY WENT AND THREE DAYS
LATER REPEATED THIS, AND THEN
GOT THE SAME ANSWER, THERE WAS
NO LEUKEMIA.
>> Reporter: SUBSEQUENT RESULTS
WERE SO CONVINCING THE DRUG
COMPANY NOVARTIS ENTERED INTO A
COMMERCIAL PARTNERSHIP WITH
PENN, INCLUDING $20 MILLION FOR
THE NEW RESEARCH CENTER.
WHILE THE CLINICAL TRIAL IS
LIMITED TO A VERY SMALL GROUP OF
PEOPLE, THE FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION HAS AGREED TO A
SPEEDY REVIEW OF THE TREATMENT
FOR WIDER USE.
TONY DEMARCO IS PATIENT 45 IN
THE TRIAL.
THE NOW-RETIRED POLICE OFFICER,
WHO LIVES WITH HIS FAMILY IN
EASTERN PENNSYLVANIA, WAS
GROWING WEAKER AS CHEMOTHERAPY
BECAME LESS AND LESS EFFECTIVE
IN KEEPING HIS LEUKEMIA AT BAY.
>> I COULDN'T FUNCTION AT ALL, I
WAS IN BED FOR TWO OR THREE DAYS
AT A TIME, YOU KNOW, I'D WAKE
UP, EAT, GO TO THE BATHROOM,
JUST GETTING UP, TAKING A SHOWER
WAS A CHORE.
>> Reporter: LAST MAY, DEMARCO
BEGAN THE NEW TREATMENT.
>> THEY PUT YOU ON A MACHINE
SIMILAR TO A DIALYSIS MACHINE,
YOU'LL HAVE ONE LINE IN ONE ARM,
AND ONE LINE IN THE OTHER ARM,
AND IT TAKES YOUR BLOOD OUT
THROUGH THE MACHINE, AND THROUGH
A CENTRIFUGE.
>> Reporter: FROM THERE, T-
CELLS, PART OF THE BODY'S IMMUNE
SYSTEM, ARE EXTRACTED FROM THE
PATIENTS BLOOD AND GENETICALLY
ALTERED TO RECOGNIZE LEUKEMIA.
THE T-CELLS ARE MODIFIED WITH
DEACTIVATED H.I.V., THE VERY
SAME VIRUS THAT CAUSES AIDS.
IN THIS CASE, THE H.I.V. IS
DOING GOOD.
THE SO-CALLED HUNTER CELLS ARE
THEN PUT BACK IN THE PATIENT.
DR. DAVID PORTER TREATS DEMARCO
AND OTHER ADULTS IN THE TRIAL.
>> THIS VIRUS IS VERY EFFICIENT
AT GETTING INTO THE T CELLS,
INTO THE IMMUNE CELLS.
I USE AN ANALOGY WHEN I EXPLAIN
THIS TO MY PATIENTS, THAT A
CANCER CELL HAS A PIECE OF
VELCRO STUCK ON IT, BUT THE T
CELL DOESN'T HAVE THE OTHER
PIECE OF VELCRO TO STICK
TOGETHER.
WE'RE GENETICALLY CHANGING THAT
T CELL TO PUT A NEW PIECE OF
VELCRO ON THE OUTSIDE, SO NOW IT
CAN SEE, AND RECOGNIZE, AND
STICK TO THE CANCER CELL, AND
START KILLING IT.
>> Reporter: DAYS FOLLOWING
DEMARCOS TRANSFUSION, THE VELCRO
STUCK.
HE BEGAN TO FEEL ILL, THE SIGNAL
THAT THE MODIFIED T-CELLS WERE
WAGING A WAR ON THE CANCER
CELLS.
>> AND DID YOU KIND OF CHEER
WHEN YOU BEGAN FEELING A LITTLE
UNDER THE WEATHER?
>> OH YEAH, WE TOOK A SELFIE,
AND SENT IT TO THE NURSES AND
EVERYTHING, SAYING GUESS WHAT,
I'M SICK, AND THEY'RE LIKE, YES!
>> Reporter: DEMARCOS POST
THERAPY SYMPTOMS WERE RELATIVELY
MILD COMPARED TO SOME OTHER
PATIENTS WHO SUFFER THROUGH DAYS
OF RAGING FEVERS AND PAIN.
IN 2012, EMILY WHITEHEAD BECAME
THE FIRST CHILD TO UNDERGO THE
EXPERIMENTAL TREATMENT AT
CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL OF
PHILADELPHIA, WHERE THE
PEDIATRIC TRIALS ARE TAKING
PLACE.
AFTER THE INFUSION, SHE WAS
NEAR-DEATH FROM THE POTENT SIDE
EFFECTS, BUT RALLIED AND IS NOW
CANCER FREE.
IN DECEMBER, THE RESEARCH TEAM
RELEASED UPDATED RESULTS OF
THEIR TRIAL: OF THE 39 CHILDREN
ENROLLED, MORE THAN 90%
RESPONDED TO THE TREATMENT AND
MOST WERE STILL IN REMISSION SIX
MONTHS LATER.
OF THE 59 ADULTS ENROLLED, ABOUT
55% PERCENT RESPONDED.
THOSE WHO DID NOT WERE STILL
FIGHTING THE DISEASE OR HAD
DIED.
SOME PATIENTS HAVE REMAINED IN
REMISSION AS LONG AS THREE OF
FOUR YEARS, DEMONSTRATING THE
DURABILITY OF THE MODIFIED
CELLS.
TONY DEMARCO IS LESS THAN A YEAR
OUT FROM HIS TREATMENT, AND A
FEELING OF WELL-BEING IS
RETURNING.
>> I'M PROBABLY UP TO ABOUT 70%
POWER.
NOW I HAVE A COUPLE BAD DAYS A
MONTH, EVERYTHING ELSE IS GOOD.
>> Reporter: THE SUSTAINED
SUCCESS OF THE TREATMENT OF
PATIENTS WITH BLOOD CANCER-
DIFFERENT FORMS OF LEUKEMIA-HAS
GOING.
NOW THEY ARE INVESTIGATING
WHETHER THE SAME APPROACH CAN BE
EQUALLY SUCCESSFUL IN TREATING
SOLID TUMORS.
ONE TARGET IS GLIOBLASTOMA, THE
TYPE OF BRAIN CANCER THAT KILLED
SENATOR EDWARD KENNEDY.
DR. MARCELA MAUS LED THE
RESEARCH USING MICE.
>> HERE'S A MOUSE THAT'S BEEN
TREATED WITH THE T CELLS THAT
WE'RE USING TO TARGET
GLIOBLASTOMA, AND WE SEE THAT
MOST OF THE TUMOR IS GONE.
SO THAT MAKES US FEEL
COMFORTABLE THINKING THAT THIS
KIND OF T CELL WOULD ACTUALLY
POTENTIALLY BE EFFECTIVE FOR
BRAIN CANCERS.
>> Reporter: AND THE RESULTS
HAVE BEEN CONSISTENT?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: SO, RECENTLY THREE
BRAIN CANCER PATIENTS WERE
TREATED WITH THE RE-ENGINEERED
T-CELLS.
ARE THEIR TUMORS SHRINKING?
>> IT'S THE CRITICAL QUESTION IN
ALL OF THIS, WERE, THERE'S SO
MUCH SCIENTIFIC APPEAL, THERE'S
A LOT OF PRE-CLINICAL DATA,
THERE'S THE CLINICAL HISTORY
WITH THE LYMPHOMA PATIENTS, BUT
WILL IT WORK IN THE BRAIN? ITS
TOO EARLY TO TELL.
UNKNOWNS INCLUDE WHETHER THE
MODIFIED T-CELLS CAN PENETRATE A
BARRIER AROUND THE BRAIN TO GET
TO THE TUMOR, AND WHETHER
PATIENTS CAN WITHSTAND THE SIDE
EFFECTS.
>> WE'VE BEEN CONCERNED FROM THE
BEGINNING THAT THE RELEASE OF
THESE COMPOUNDS CALLED CYTOKINES
FROM THE T CELLS WOULD CAUSE A
LOT OF INFLAMMATION IN THE
BRAIN, AND THE BRAINS A CLOSED
STRUCTURE, AND IF YOU HAVE
INFLAMMATION AND SWELLING PEOPLE
COULD GET SICK.
>> I WILL ALSO ASK FOR THE
APPROPRIATION OF AN EXTRA $100
MILLION TO FIND A CURE FOR
CANCER.
>> Reporter: SINCE THEN,
PRESIDENT RICHARD NIXON DECLARED
A WAR ON CANCER IN 1971,
PROMISING DEVELOPMENTS LATER
DISAPPOINTED.
SO THE ENTHUSIASM AT PENN IS
TEMPERED BY HISTORY.
>> WE NEED TO BE CAREFUL NOT TO
GO AND RAISE EXPECTATIONS
PREMATURELY, BUT I THINK THE
FIELD NOW BELIEVES THAT WERE ON
THE VERGE WHERE THIS CAN HAPPEN,
BUT WE ALSO NEED CAUTION.
>> Reporter: IF THESE EARLY
RESULTS DO HOLD UP, QUESTIONS
WOULD THEN ARISE ABOUT THE COST
OF TREATING LARGE NUMBERS OF
CANCER PATIENTS WITH CUSTOMIZED
MEDICINE THAT CANNOT BE MASS
PRODUCED.
THERE IS ALSO THE ISSUE OF
SCALABILITY.
>> EVERY DOSE OF THIS IS
INDIVIDUALIZED TO A SPECIFIC
PATIENT, HOW DO YOU DO THAT FOR
NOT
JUST IN PHILADELPHIA, BUT AROUND
THE COUNTRY, AND IN FACT AROUND
THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: IF ALL GOES
ACCORDING TO PLAN, DOCTORS HERE
BELIEVE THE F.D.A. COULD APPROVE
THIS THERAPY FOR BLOOD CANCERS
NEXT YEAR, WHICH IS WHEN THE NEW
CENTER IS EXPECTED TO BE UP AND
RUNNING.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, THIS IS
JACKIE JUDD IN PHILADELPHIA.
>> Ifill: YOU CAN LEARN MORE
ABOUT THIS PROMISING NEW
TREATMENT.
FIND A LINK TO THE UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA'S SITE, ON OUR
HOMEPAGE, pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: THIS YEAR,
MILLENNIALS, THE GROUP ROUGHLY
18 TO 34-YEARS-OLD, WILL
OVERTAKE BABY BOOMERS AS THE
LARGEST LIVING GENERATION IN THE
COUNTRY.
AND EVEN AT THE DAWN OF THEIR
CAREERS, IT TURNS OUT THEY ARE
MORE WORRIED ABOUT RETIREMENT
THAN PREVIOUS GENERATIONS. AND
PERHAPS THEY SHOULD BE.
HERE TO HELP FILL IN THE
PICTURE: JEN MISHORY, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF "YOUNG INVINCIBLES,"
AN ADVOCACY GROUP FOR YOUNG
ADULTS, AND DAVID JOHN, SENIOR
POLICY ADVISOR WITH  A.A.R.P.
HE ALSO WORKS ON RETIREMENT
ISSUES AT THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION.
AND WELCOME BOTH OF YOU TO THE
"NEWSHOUR."
>> THANKS SO MUCH FOR HAVING US.
>> Woodruff: SO WE KNOW TODAY
THE AVERAGE RETIREMENT AGE FOR
MEN IS 64, FOR WOMEN IT'S 62.
AND WE ALSO KNOW THAT STUDIES
ARE SHOWING THAT MOST
MILLENNIALS EXPECT TO RETIRE,
THEY SAY, BY AGE 65, BUT THEY
PLAN TO KEEP ON WORKING WHILE
THEY'RE IN RETIREMENT.
JEN MISHORY, HOW MUCH ARE THEY
THINKING ABOUT RETIREMENT, THIS
GENERATION?
>> YEAH, YOUNG PEOPLE ARE
THINKING ABOUT RETIREMENT TODAY.
WHEN YOUNG PEOPLE, FOR EXAMPLE,
HAVE ACCESS TO A RETIREMENT
ACCOUNT, THEY ARE ACTUALLY
SAVING AT A RELATIVELY
CONSISTENT RATE.
THE PROBLEM IS WE'RE NOT SEEING
YOUNG PEOPLE ACCESSING THINGS
LIKE RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS AT THE
SAME RATE.
SO ONLY ABOUT HALF OF WORKERS
HAVE ACCESS TO THAT KIND OF
TRADITIONAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNT.
YOUNG PEOPLE, 25% OF YOUNG
PEOPLE ARE PART-TIME WORKERS, SO
YOU'RE SEEING FEWER AND FEWER
YOUNG WORKERS HAVING ACCESS TO
THOSE KINDS OF MECHANISMS TO
ACTUALLY SAVE AND AT THE SAME
TIME STRUGGLING WITH THINGS LIKE
STUDENT DEBT COMING OUT OF THIS
RECESSION.
SO WE'RE LOOKING AT A PROBLEM
AROUND WEALTH ACCUMULATION.
>> Woodruff: SOUNDS LIKE A
VERY MIXED PICTURE.
>> YEAH.
>> Woodruff: DAVID JOHN, WHAT
WOULD YOU ADD TO THAT IN TERMS
OF HOW MUCH THEY'RE THINKING
ABOUT RETIREMENT, WHY THEY
AREN'T OR WHY THEY CAN'T AND WHY
THEY WANT TO IN.
>> WELL, ONE OF THE THINGS IS
MILLENNIALS HAVE LEARNED FROM
WHAT HAPPENED TO THEIR PARENTS,
AND THEY'VE SEEN THE STRUGGLES
THEIR PARENTS WENT THROUGH WHEN
THEIR RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS WERE
HIT IN 2008 FOR THE MOST PART.
THEY ARE... WHEN THEY HAVE
ACCESS, AND THAT'S A CRUCIAL
THING, WHEN THEY HAVE ACCESS TO
A RETIREMENT PAYROLL DEDUCTION
AT WORK, THEY ARE SAVING AND
THEY ARE PARTICIPATING AND THEY
ARE MUCH MORE INTERESTED THAN
SAY PREVIOUS GENERATIONS WERE AT
THIS STAGE OF LIFE.
>> Woodruff: AT THIS STAGE.
GENERAL X IS THE NEXT OLDER
GENERATION OR CERTAINLY THE BABY
BOOMERS.
WE HAVE ANOTHER I THINK
STATISTIC WE WANT TO SHOW.
POLLS ARE SHOWING 70% OF MILL
MILLENNIALS ARE ALREADY SAVING
FOR RETIREMENT.
81% OF THEM SAY THEY ARE WORRIED
THAT SOCIAL SECURITY WON'T BE
THERE FOR THEM.
JEN MISHORY, HOW MUCH DO WE KNOW
ABOUT HOW RETIREMENT IS GOING TO
LOOK DIFFERENT FOR THIS
GENERATION THAN IT DOES TODAY.
>> I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
TAKE ACCOUNT OF THE BROADER
ECONOMIC PICTURE FACING
MILLENNIALS.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT $1.2
TRILLION IN STUDENT DEBT.
THE AVERAGE DEBTOR WALKS OFF A
CAMPUS WITH $30,000 IN STUDENT
DEBT.
TOUGH TO PUT THAT AMOUNT ASIDE
IN SAVINGS WHEN YOU'RE FIGURING
OUT HOW THE FIGURE OUT HOW TO
PAY DOWN THAT WET.
WE'RE ALSO TALKING ABOUT WAGES
THAT HAVE BEEN DROPPING TWICE AS
FAST FOR YOUNG WORKERS THAN
OLDER WORKERS.
WE'RE SEEING AN ECONOMIC PICTURE
THAT'S TOUGH FOR THIS
GENERATION.
TO THEN BE THINKING ABOUT
SOCKING AWAY MONEY FOR THE
LONG-TERM.
I THINK IT'S A QUESTION MARK IF
YOUNG PEOPLE DO HAVE THAT NEST
EGG WHEN THEY'RE LOOKING FOR
RETIREMENT.
>> GIVEN THOSE OBSTACLES, HOW
ARE THEY PUTTING MONEY ASIDE
WHEN THEY'RE ABLE TO?
WHAT DOES IT LOOK LIKE?
>> WELL, WHEN THEY ARE ABLE TO,
THEY'RE PARTICIPATING IN
401(K)s OR I.R.A.s IF
THEY'RE OFFERED BY THEIR
EMPLOYER, BUT AT BEST ROUGHLY
ONE OUT OF TWO WORKERS ACTUALLY
HAS THAT OPPORTUNITY IN THE
WORKPLACE.
IF THEY DON'T HAVE THAT, AND
THIS IS TRUE ACROSS GENERATION,
MOST PEOPLE DON'T SAVE FOR
RETIREMENT.
ROUGHLY ONE OUT OF 20 ACTUALLY
DOES.
>>
>> Woodruff: IS THERE ADVICE
YOU TYPICALLY WOULD GIVE, DAVID
JOHN TO, YOUNG PEOPLE AS THEY'RE
THINKING ABOUT IT?
BECAUSE I THINK FOR MANY YOUNG
PEOPLE, WHEN THEY LOOK AT INCOME
LIMITED AT THIS STAGE, HOW MUCH
THE COST OF HOUSING IS, THEY MAY
WONDER, IS THIS REALLY SOMETHING
I CAN AFFORD TO DO.
>> THEY WOULD WONDER, THAT YES,
AND JUST AS PEOPLE DID WHEN I
WAS YOUNGER, BUT STARTING
YOUNGER IS ACTUALLY THE SMARTEST
THING THEY CAN POSSIBLY DO.
IF YOU START TO SAVE AT A YOUNG
AGE, YOU CAN SAVE A SMALLER
PROPORTION OF YOUR WORKPLACE
INCOME, AND YOU CAN ACTUALLY GET
TO A GOOD PLACE MUCH EASIER.
IF YOU START LATER, YOU'RE GOING
TO HAVE TO SAVE A HIGHER
PERCENTAGE OF YOUR INCOME, AND
THE ODDS ARE YOU ARE NOT GOING
TO MAKE YOUR GOALS.
>> Woodruff: LET'S TALK MORE
ABOUT THE FINANCIAL OBSTACLES
FACING THEM.
WE KNOW THAT 4 1% OF MILLENNIALS
HAVE SAID IN A POLL, THEY EXPECT
TO FINANCIALLY SUPPORT THEIR
PARENTS, AND YOU MENTIONED THIS
A MINUTE AGO, JIM, THE AVERAGE
MILLENNIAL, $115,000 IN STUDENT
LOAN DEBT OVER THE COURSE OF A
LIFETIME.
YOU CITED A REALLY JAW-DROPPING
NUMBER.
THAT REALLY DOES CLOUD THE
PICTURE FOR THEM OVER THE YEARS,
DOESN'T IT?
>> YEAH, THAT'S RIGHT.
I MEAN, I THINK THAT ESPECIALLY
YOU'RE RIGHT TO TALK ABOUT, YOU
KNOW, WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT IN
TERMS OF A PARENT, A
GRANDPARENT.
WHEN YOUNG PEOPLE ARE THINKING
ABOUT HOW THEY'RE SAVING, HOW
THEY'RE SUPPORTING THEIR
PARENTS, FOR A WHILE DURING THE
GREAT RECESSION A LOT OF YOUNG
PEOPLE WERE LIVING AT HOME, HOW
PARENTS WERE SUPPORTING THIS
GENERATION, IT'S HOLIESTIC
FAMILY PICTURE WHEN THEY'RE
THINKING ABOUT THE BROAD
FINANCIAL CHALLENGES, BUT
ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
IT'S TOUGH WHEN YOU'RE FIGURING
OUT, DO YOU PUT THAT EXTRA $100
TOWARD A STUDENT DEBT PAYMENT OR
PUT IT INTO A RETIREMENT
ACCOUNT.
THOSE ARE SORTED OF THE TOUGH
DECISIONS THAT YOUNG PEOPLE ARE
FACING.
AGAIN, OFTEN THEY DON'T HAVE
ACCESS TO A RETIREMENT ACCOUNT.
>> Woodruff: DAVID JOHN, WHAT
ABOUT PEOPLE IN A POSITION THE
MAKE A DIFFERENCE IN TERMS OF
PUBLIC POLICY RIGHT FOR THESE
YOUNG PEOPLE.
WE KNOW CONGRESS HASN'T BEEN
ABLE NO DO A WHOLE LOT ABOUT
SOCIAL SECURITY OR MEDICARE.
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE WORRIED
ABOUT THAT.
IN TERMS OF THIS YOUNGER
GENERATION, WHAT DO THEY NEED
POLICY-MAKERS TO BE THINKING?
>> WHAT THEY REALLY NEED MORE
THAN ANYTHING ELSE IS TO HAVE
ACCESS TO A RETIREMENT SAVINGS
ACCOUNT.
AS I SAY, PAYROLL DEDUCTION IS
ABSOLUTELY ESSENTIAL TO GET INTO
THE SAVINGS HABIT.
AND SAVINGS IS A HABIT JUST LIKE
PHYSICAL EXERCISE.
THE THING THEY NEED TO DO IS TO
BE ABLE TO MOVE THEIR RETIREMENT
ACCOUNTS EASILY FROM JOB TO JOB,
BECAUSE WE KNOW MILLENNIALS ARE
SWITCHING JOBS SOMEWHAT FASTER
THAN PREVIOUS GENERATIONS.
>> RIGHT NOW THAT'S NOT ALWAYS
SOMETHING THAT'S EASY.
>> IT CAN BE VERY DIFFICULT.
>> LAST BUT NOT LEAST, THIS IS
TRUE ACROSS GENERATIONS, WE NEED
TO THINK MUCH MORE ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN YOU REACH
RETIREMENT AND YOU HAVE A LUMP
OF SAVINGS PROBABLY MORE THAN
YOU'VE EVER HAD IN YOUR LIFE,
BUT HOW DO YOU MAKE THAT STRETCH
OUT AND LAST UNTIL THE END OF
YOUR LIFE?
>> .
>> Woodruff: JEN MISHORY, IN
THE FEW SECONDS WE HAVE LEFT,
WHAT'S THE MAIN ADVICE YOU WOULD
LEAVE THIS YOUNGER GENERATION
WITH WHEN IT COMES TO THINKING
ABOUT THE FUTURE?
>> I THINK A LOT OF MILLENNIALS
ARE THERE, RIGHT?
THEY ARE, THOSE WHO HAVE ACCESS
ARE SAVING.
THEY REALIZE IT'S IMPORTANT, BUT
I ALSO THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
BE THINKING ABOUT RETIREMENT IN
THE LONG TERM, BUT ALSO ABOUT
HOW YOU'RE MANAGING STUDENT
DEBT, WHICH IS A REAL OBSTACLE
OR IT IS A REAL QUESTION.
SO I THINK THINKING BROADLY AND
HOLISTICALLY ABOUT THE ECONOMIC
PICTURE THAT YOU'RE FACING, AND
THEN FIGURING OUT WHAT MAKESHE T
MOST SENSE TO YOU ON A
MONTH-TO-MONTH BASIS.
>> Woodruff: HOW OLD DO YOU
THINK YOU'LL BE WHEN YOU RETIRE?
>> IT'S HARD TO SAY AT THIS
POINT, REALLY HARD TO SAY.
>> Woodruff: IT'S A LONG WAY
OFF, I CAN SAY THAT.
DAVID JOHN AND JEN MISHORY, WE
THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY, TO OUR
"NEWSHOUR SHARES" OF THE DAY,
METHSOING THAT CAUGHT OUR EYE
THAT MIGHT BE OF INTEREST TO
YOU, TOO.
IN NORTHERN IRELAND, IN A CITY
NOTORIOUS FOR ITS PROTESTANT-
CATHOLIC TENSIONS, A BEAUTIFULLY
INTRICATE STRUCTURE HAS BEEN
DRAWING LARGE CROWDS.
THEY'RE COMING TO SEE A 75-FOOT
WOODEN TEMPLE, THE CREATION OF
AMERICAN ARTIST DAVID BEST, WHO
ALSO BUILDS STRUCTURES FOR THE
ANNUAL "BURNING MAN" FESTIVAL IN
NEVADA.
CATHOLICS AND PROTESTANTS CAME
TOGETHER OVER TWO YEARS TO BUILD
IT IN LONDONDERRY, ALSO CALLED
DERRY.
IT'S OPEN TO RESIDENTS TO WRITE
ABOUT THEIR HOPES AND DREAMS ON
THE WALLS.
THEY HAVE UNTIL SATURDAY TO
LEAVE THEIR MESSAGES.
ON THAT DAY, THE TEMPLE WILL BE
REMCEONIOUSLY SET ON FIRE.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU CLAIMED AN ELECTION
VICTORY AFTER EXIT POLLS SHOWED
HIS BLOC CAME FROM BEHIND TO TIE
ITS MAIN CHALLENGER.
AND, A ONE-TIME REPUBLICAN
RISING STAR, ILLINOIS
CONGRESSMAN AARON SCHOCK,
ABRUPTLY RESIGNED OVER
ALLEGATIONS OF LAVISH SPENDING
FROM HIS OFFICE ACCOUNT.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, TODAY WE INVITED OUR
TWITTER FANS TO AN OPEN
DISCUSSION ABOUT RACE IN AMERICA
AND THE NEXT GENERATION'S
ATTITUDES ON DISCRIMINATION, ALL
OF THIS IN LIGHT OF A VIDEO THAT
SURFACED EARLIER THIS MONTH
FEATURING A FRATERNITY CHANTING
RACIAL SLURS.
MANY OF YOU CHIMED IN TO SAY
THAT THE ATTITUDES EXPRESSED BY
MEMBERS OF SIGMA ALPHA EPSILON,
OR S.A.E., WERE NOT SURPRISING.
KIRSTEN WEST SAVALI, A SENIOR
WRITER FOR "THE ROOT," TWEETED
THAT THE VIDEO IS NOT AN
ANOMALY, AND THAT, "THE CASUAL
BLOODLUST AND DEHUMANIZATION OF
BLACK BODIES IS AS OLD AS THE
COUNTRY ITSELF."
PROFESSOR MARC LAMONT HILL,
TWEETED: "THE TRAGEDY OF S.A.E.
ISN'T THE USE OF THE N-WORD.
IT'S THE DEEPER INSTITUTIONAL
AND INTERPERSONAL LEVELS OF
RACISM."
YOU CAN SEE THE ENTIRE
CONVERSATION, PART OF A SERIES
CALLED "RACE TODAY," ON OUR
HOMEPAGE, THAT'S
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT WHY
PLACES LIKE THE TWIN CITIES
OFFER YOUNG PEOPLE THE BEST
CHANCE TO MOVE UP THE ECONOMIC
LADDER.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE,
AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.